From: Vanessa Olmo [mailto:vanessa@business-endeavors.com] 
Sent: Monday, June 14, 2010 5:36 PM
To: Vanessa Olmo
Subject: GAW17 Update
 
GAW17 "Mini-Exome" Data Set Update
 
We apologize for the delay in getting this data set out to you for
analysis.  We encountered some unanticipated difficulties with the
processing of the sequence data.  We have begun phenotype simulations
and hope to have the data ready for distribution in about two weeks.
We realize this leaves limited time for analysis and we will adjust
the GAW schedule as much as we can to allow for this.  There is a data
request form on the GAW web page:
 
http://www.gaworkshop.org
 
that you can fill in now and we will send you the data as soon as it
becomes available.
 
Some participants have asked for a fuller description of the data set
so that they can begin to plan their analyses in advance of receiving
the data.  We have exon sequence data for > 500 genes, spanning all
autosomes, in > 600 unrelated individuals.  Not all regions were
sequenced in all individuals; we have eliminated genes with few
individuals sequenced and we are using haplotype information to impute
missing genotypes so that all individuals will have data for all
markers distributed.  Allele frequencies for the markers range from
private variants to MAFs > 40%, with most variants being rare (over
half MAF < 1%, only 1/10 MAF > 5%).  We will distribute marker
genotypes, the genes to which they are assigned, chromosomal locations
for these markers/genes, and limited annotation regarding placement of
markers within exons.
 
These genotypes will be used multiple times for several different
simulated study designs.  First, there will be a set of unrelated
individuals, with a one-to-one correspondence with the available set
of sequenced unrelated individuals.  Second, these individuals will be
used as the founders for a family-based sample, with genotypes dropped
through extended pedigrees.  For those familiar with past GAW data
sets, these pedigrees are based on the structures used for simulated
data in GAWs 10 and 12, with an average of about 40 individuals per
family.  Although the 1000 Genomes samples are drawn from multiple
populations, population membership is not being taken into account in
the simulations, either in assigning founders to families or in
phenotype simulation.  Population effects may still exist, however,
due to varying allele frequencies between groups.
 
Some of the SNPs have been designated as functional for phenotype
simulation.  I won?t go into much detail about the phenotype
simulations for those who wish to remain blind to the ?answers?.
There will be a common, dichotomous disease phenotype, multiple
related quantitative risk factors, sex, and a dichotomous
environmental factor.  There will be a range of underlying models and
effect sizes.  We believe that the range of models being simulated
will have something for everyone, but if your analysis plans depend on
a specific type of model or effect being present, please inquire and
we can tell you whether that model or effect is included in the
simulation.
 
There will be 200 replicates of the simulated phenotype data, all
using the same set of marker data, as there was for the simulated
GAW16 data.